---
reference: CASA0013
url: https://www.ucl.ac.uk/module-catalogue/modules/foundations-of-spatial-data-science-CASA0013
name: Foundations of Spatial Data Science
faculty: bartlet
reading-list-url: https://ucl.rl.talis.com/modules/casa0013.html
reading-list: 14F7EC69-3236-486A-5D3B-01B939E718AE
credits: 15
mark-scheme: numeric-marks
lectures: 10
frequency: weekly
lecture-hours: 2
support-hours:
module-leader: jon-reades
assessment-methods: 60% Group Activity (2 assessments), 30% Dissertations/Extended Projects/Reports, 10% Coursework
email: bartlett.pg-casa@ucl.ac.uk
entry-date: 2026-03-10
level: 7
terms: 1
required-course:
student-count: 99
---

# Content

The module provides students with a practical introduction to Python programming, alongside readings and discussions examining the technical practices and wider ethics of (spatial) data science. As such, it is intended to complement Quantitative Methods and Geographic Information Systems by showing how geographic and quantitative concepts are applied as part of a larger piece of practical spatial data science analysis. In short, alongside basic programming skills, we seek to develop a clear understanding that ‘the data do not speak for themselves’. 

These considerations will be positioned within an end-to-end data science ‘pipeline’ incorporating the principal tools employed in industry and academia, leading students through data cleaning and visualisation to interpretation and presentation. By situating these issues within a wider disciplinary ‘terrain’ of debates around the construction and validity of different types of knowledge, it is hoped that students will find ways to apply what they have learned here to both their studies and to developing post-graduation employment opportunities.

# Teaching delivery

The module is taught in a 10-week 'flipped' format, involving a mix of assigned pre-recorded videos, in-class discussion/presentation, and practical sessions involving computational notebooks. Coursework seeks to assess student learning primarily through group work.

# Indicative topics

The exact sequencing and content of the module is continuously evolving in response to student feedback, but currently includes:

* Acquiring the basics of programming, including variable types, lists, and dictionaries.
* Building efficiency in code, including functions, libraries, and methods/classes.
* Examining a large, real-word data set through numeric, spatial, and textual lenses.
* Communicating results through the selection and presentation of data.
* Building reproducibility throughout the data science 'stack', including the use of the command line, virtual machines (Docker/Podman), Git/GitHub, and Quarto.

The technical elements are covered in the pre-recorded lectures and practicals, but are intended to mesh with the critical understanding developed through the readings and participation in the in-class discussion, to create an opportunity to apply module knowledge to a real-world problem such as the impact of Airbnb on London. This is not just a programming class.

# Recommended reading

The weekly readings are intended to anchor growing technical competence in a deeper understanding that 'the data do not speak for themselves'. Indicative readings include:

D’Ignazio, C. and Klein, L.F. (2020). Data Feminism.
Delmelle, E.C. and Nilsson, I. (2021). “The Language of Neighborhoods: A Predictive-Analytical Framework Based on Property Advertisement Text and Mortgage Lending Data.” Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 88.
Knuth, D.E. (1984). “Literate Programming.” The Computer Journal 27 (2). Oxford University Press:97–111.
Massey, D. (1996). “Politicising Space and Place.” Scottish Geographical Magazine 112 (2). Routledge:117–23.
Mattern, S. (2015). “Mission control: A history of the urban dashboard.” Places Journal.
Mattern, S. (2017). “A City Is Not a Computer.” Places Journal.
Reades, J. and Yingjie, H. and Tranos, E. and Delmelle, E. (2025). “The City as Text.” Nature Cities.
Gillian, R. (1997). “Situating Knowledges: Positionality, Reflexivities and Other Tactics.” Progress in Human Geography 21(3):305–20.

# Recommended software

The entire module is taught using Free Open Source Software (FOSS) so the only issues students are likely to encounter are having insufficient free memory (RAM) or storage (Hard Drive) capacity on the computer itself. We recommend a system with at least 24GB of RAM (16GB is sufficient, but not performant) and more than 50GB of free space on their hard drive. Students may choose to purchase a Markdown editor or visual user interface for Git/GitHub but these are entirely optional and are most worthwhile for those who intend to continue beyond the final assessment with the tools and techniques covered in-class.

Please note: students with little or no prior knowledge of programming are strongly encouraged to complete Code Camp (https://jreades.github.io/code-camp/) prior to the start of term. Student feedback from previous years indicates that this short, self-paced introduction has been very helpful for those wishing to do well on the module.
