---
reference: CASA0001
url: https://www.ucl.ac.uk/module-catalogue/modules/urban-systems-theory-CASA0001
name: Urban Systems Theory
faculty: bartlet
reading-list-url: https://ucl.rl.talis.com/modules/casa0001.html
credits: 15
mark-scheme: numeric-marks
lectures: 10
frequency: weekly
lecture-hours: 2
support-hours: 1
module-leader: jens-kandt
assessment-methods: 100% Coursework (2 assessments)
email: bartlett.pg-casa@ucl.ac.uk
entry-date: 2026-03-10
level: 7
terms: 1
required-course:
student-count: 117
---

# Content

This module provides a social science foundation to the study of cities and a cross-disciplinary introduction to urban theory and science.
We will discuss fundamental concepts and models developed by urban geographers, planners and social thinkers and practice critical, scientific
and scholarly engagement with the study of cities and urbanisation, which will help you prepare for careers in academia, government or industry.
Topics include urbanisation, systems and complexity theory, urban form and function, mobility, socio-spatial differentiation and urban governance.

# Indicative topics

Topics include: key theories and concepts in urban geography and science; current debates on transport, health, socio-spatial differentiation and planning; systems thinking, casual diagrams and other analytical tools.

# Module aims 

After having taken this module, you should be able to:

* apply systems thinking and social science theories to the study cities;
* conceptualise the interrelationships between cities, society and space;
* develop critical thinking skills related to urban systems; and
* participate in the scientific discourse on urban issues; and 
* outline meaningful research inquiries into urban phenomena.

Recommended readings

* Batty, M. (2018) Inventing Future Cities. Cambridge MA: MIT Press. [doi:10.7551/mitpress/11923.001.0001](https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/11923.001.0001).
* J. Lin & C. Mele (eds.) (2012) The Urban Sociology Reader. London: Routledge. [doi:10.4324/9780203103333](https:/doi.org/h10.7551/mitpress/11923.001.0001).
* Pacione, M. (2009) Urban Geography: a Global Perspective. London: Routledge. [doi:10.4324/9780203881927](https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203881927).
