---
reference: CASA0028
url: https://www.ucl.ac.uk/module-catalogue/modules/designing-spatial-data-stories-CASA0028
name: Designing Spatial Data Stories
faculty: "[[faculty/bartlet]]"
reading-list-url: https://ucl.rl.talis.com/modules/casa0028.html
credits: 15
mark-scheme: numeric-marks
lectures: 10
frequency: weekly
lecture-hours: 1
support-hours:
module-leader: "[[person/duncan-hay]]"
assessment-methods: 20% Coursework, 80% Group Activity
email: bartlett.pg-casa@ucl.ac.uk
entry-date: 2026-03-10
level: "[[level/7]]"
terms: 2
required-course:
student-count: 39
---

# Content

In this module you will learn to use modern web development techniques, data visualisation libraries and Large Language Models/Generative AI to create ‘spatial data stories’. This phrase captures the idea that the ways in which we visualise data, the sequencing and timing of how we present it, and the interactions that we design around it all work together to create narratives that shape the way people interpret the world.

You will gain practical experience of creating spatial data stories to advance and support the arguments which emerge from your work as a spatial data scientist. At the same time, you will develop the ability to explain and justify your work in relation to cutting-edge sociological, theoretical and design research about the role of data in contemporary societies.

Core Questions for Exploration:

* How do data visualisations shape our interpretation of the world?
* What effects do our design choices have on users of our data visualisations?
* How is data operationalised in various contexts for different users?
* How can we design visualisations to best support the stories we aim to tell with data?

Practical, Design-Led Prototyping: You will engage in practical exercises using modern web development libraries and novel, socially relevant datasets in response to design briefs. Technologies taught may include:

* User Interface Libraries such as React and NextJS
* Cloud Backend Services such as Firebase 
* Visualisation and Mapping Libraries such as Maplibre, Deck.gl and Visx

Novel, interesting data sources: In addition to familiar sources such as OpenStreetMap and the UK Census, you will have the opportunity to work with novel spatial data sets drawn from research in history and heritage, art, literature, ecology, and architecture.

Integration of Large Language Models: You will be taught to utilise generative Large Language Models such as GitHub Copilot to rapidly create interactive data visualisation prototypes. This is for two reasons:

1. To prepare you to use these tools in your professional careers by providing a firm understanding of their use cases, limitations, and the ethical questions they raise.
2. To allow you to focus on learning the things the LLM can't do: critical thinking, understanding the relationships between data, design, interpretation; and the social and ethical implications of data and generative AI.

This comprehensive program aims to equip students with both the technical skills and theoretical knowledge necessary to create impactful, engaging interactive data visualisations and the ability to demonstrate an understanding of the social and ethical issues that these practices raise.

Prerequisites: Students should have some programming experience (in any programming language) and should have knowledge of basic concepts such as variables, data types, and functions. Knowledge of JavaScript and HTML would be an advantage.

# Teaching delivery

This module is taught in 10 weekly 1 hour lectures and 2 hour practical workshops.

# Indicative Topics

* Lecture topics could include (but are not limited to):
* Spatial Data Stories: Data in Action
* Data, the State, and Society
* Conceptualising the User
* Principles of Design Justice
* What Interfaces Disclose and What They Hide
* User Centred Design
* Visual Storytelling
* Speculative Design

The workshop series is structured so that that weeks 1-5 prioritise building skills with modern web UI libraries (eg. React) and LLMs (such as GitHub Copilot). In weeks 5-10, students will work on group websites in response to a design brief.

Indicative topics for weeks 1-5 could include:

* The Front-End Development Environment 
* The Anatomy of a React Website
* Bootstrapping a React App with Copilot
* Visualisation with React 1: VisX, Recharts
* Visualisation with React 2: MapComponents

Module aims

* To gain practical experience of designing and creating interactive data visualisation websites using generative AI as a prototyping tool.
* To be able to explain how interactive data visualisations and apps tell stories about the world, and how to gain practical experience of designing them to advance an argument.
* To be able to draw on theories of how data has been used and understood from a sociological perspective, and to use this knowledge to inform, iterate and evaluate your own web development work.


# Learning Outcomes

* To be able to use modern web visualisation libraries for different communication and rhetorical purposes and to appraise their success.
* Be able to work collaboratively to develop a prototype spatial data story which uses the techniques and theory taught on the course to effectively communicate an argument in visual, interactive form.
* Be able to use an LLM (eg. GitHub Copilot) to scaffold a prototype web application built with a modern UI library (such as React) with an interactive visualisation component.
* Be able to apply technical knowledge in the use of a modern JavaScript UI development library for the purposes of prototyping.
* Be able to identify and critically appraise the way different interactive visualisation tools create spatial data stories.
* Appraise and evaluate the use cases and limitations of using Large Language Models for developing data visualisations.
* To articulate and critically address sociological issues and questions that may be raised in relation to data and data visualisation and their role in different societies.

# Recommended readings

* Alberto Cairo, The Functional Art: An Introduction to Information Graphics and Visualization
* Sasha Costanza-Chock, Design Justice: Community-Led Practices to Build the Worlds We Need
* Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby, Speculative Everything: Design, Fiction, and Social Dreaming
* Ilya Kantor et.al, The Modern JavaScript Tutorial (chapter on JavaScript Fundamentals), https://javascript.info/ 
* James C. Scott, Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed

# Recommended software

Visual Studio Code

# Restrictions

Students should have some experience of programming in any language. Students should be familiar with basic concepts like variables and functions.
